---
created: October 24, 2022
title: The Quest for Meaning
tags: computer-science, math
---

Over the next ten years, humanity will experience its biggest collective
existential crisis. The results of which will define how we live our life and
answer if it’s even worth living in the first place.

Most humans–except the hardcore nihilists–have some sense of purpose, or reason
that keeps us from moving despite our continued struggle. For some, it is our
passion–playing an instrument, researching, painting, etc.

$$
e =mc^2
$$

But what will happen if all our passion can be made better, and more efficient,
without losing its “human touch.” What if anything creative we do can be
automated? What will happen to our sense of ‘meaning’?

Before College, I decided to study Computer Science to become a Deep Learning
Researcher. Back then, I wanted to go to the International Mathematical
Olympiad (IMO), the most prestigious competition in Mathematics to compete. But
my mediocre skills in Mathematics made this impossible. I just didn’t have the
proper training or the skills to become a representative of our country.

This has led me to pivot to another goal, to become among the group of
inventors who successfully designs an AI that can win in this competition. Back
then I thought that this would take several decades, but with the dawn of GPT-3
an AI that can write beautifully-worded novels, and DALL-E 2, capable of making
art just using text–rivaling that of artists, I’m not so sure anymore.

Humans have dominated this planet and become the Apex predator, not because of
our sheer strength or speed to run away from predators–but because of our
intellect. But what will happen if we create a “creature” that can rival our
minds in everything that we do?

Humans are curious, we have this innate passion that drives us to create
something bigger than ourselves. Wouldn’t it be ironic if this same passion
would lead to the demise of our collective species? I believe that, over the
next several years, researchers will be able to simulate every molecule in our
body and create a perfect digital recreation of our humanity. If an AI can
simulate every part of “us,” and our environment what will differentiate it
from us? I suspect that people will create rights for AI, similar to what we do
for animals.

The thought of becoming among the people who will lead our species to demise
frightens me. I feel like specializing in this field is tantamount to being a
researcher just before the dawn of Nuclear Warheads, which often makes me
question whether I’m pursuing the “right” track.

With that in mind, I want to express this existentialist dread with my “art.”
By “art” I mean, something that is made by Midjourney, an AI generation tool,
used by artists around the world. 

It came up with these two images, 
  

The exact words I used for these images is “a robot questioning the meaning of
its life in expressionistic style”
  
What I love about these images is the eeriness, that deep feeling of
loneliness, and the urge to define what gives its life meaning. I asked for an
expressionistic style since this style of painting attempts to make a more
accurate representation of our state of mind. As if I’m explicitly asking the
AI what gives its life a purpose? 
  
Which is roughly the same feeling I have right now. What will give my life
purpose if everything I can do, every creative venture I could imagine
doing–can be made better and more efficient by an artificial creature living
inside our computers?


What will happen to our sense of meaning?
